---
layout: post
title: All About the OVSDB Server
comments: true
categories: Open vSwitch, OVSDB, Python, Database
---

In [my previous post](/2014/09/hardware_vtep.html), I briefly introduced
the OVSDB Management Protocol in the process of talking about hardware
VTEPs. In this post, I will focus on specific OVSDB Server features. And
to do that, I will (mis)use it outside of SDN.

## Huh??? But OVSDB == SDN!

Actually, no. OVSDB can exist independent of Open vSwitch. In fact,
what's actually happening under the covers is that Open vSwitch connects
to OVSDB and monitors certain tables in the Open_vSwitch database for
updates. When OVS receives update notifications from OVSDB, the former
then gets to work creating and manipulating bridges, ports, etc.

## Alright, so OVSDB is a Management Protocol!

Actually, no. OVSDB does not do anything to the host system. All it does
is receive messages relating to data it has and responds accordingly.
If anything needs to be done on the host system, that will be the job of
external clients connecting to and monitoring tables inside OVSDB.

## So...OVSDB is just a database engine?

Bingo! And here are its features:

1. Native JSON RPC v1 support. In fact, this is the only way you
   can talk to it;
1. Persistent plain TCP socket connections. No HTTP overhead. You can
   optionally wrap your connections with SSL/TLS for super secret
   message sending;
1. Journaled in-memory datastore;
1. Atomic transactions;
1. Relational data with automatic garbage collection of orphaned rows;
1. And more!

## Hands-on Part 1: Using OVSDB as a To Do List database

I hope I got you intrigued about OVSDB's features. Let's dive deeper
by creating our own database using the ovsdb-client CLI tool. The first
database we will create is a To Do List database. But before everything
else, let's reload [ovs-lab](https://github.com/relaxdiego/ovs-lab)
to a known good state.

{% highlight bash %}
$ cd path/to/ovs-lab

$ git pull

$ vagrant reload --provision
{% endhighlight %}

Once reloading is done, let's ssh to each of the servers on different
terminals via `vagrant ssh server1`, `vagrant ssh internet`, and
`vagrant ssh server2`. Next, inside of `server1`, let's login as root
and ensure that Open vSwitch and OVSDB are not running:

{% highlight bash %}
vagrant@server1:~$ sudo su -

root@server1:~# ovs-appctl -t ovs-vswitchd exit

root@server1:~# ovs-appctl -t ovsdb-server exit
{% endhighlight %}

Next, we'll create a new database using a schema definition file that
I've included in the lesson03 directory named `todo.ovsschema`:

{% highlight bash %}
root@server1:~# mkdir /etc/tododb

root@server1:~# ovsdb-tool create /etc/tododb/todo.db /vagrant/shared/lesson03/todo.ovsschema
{% endhighlight %}

Let's take a moment to read the schema definition we just loaded. I'll
focus on the part of the schema definition that talks about the tables.

{% highlight json linenos %}
{
    "List": {
        "columns": {
            "name": {
                "type": "string"
            },
            "items": {
                "type": {
                    "key": {
                        "type": "uuid",
                        "refTable": "Item"
                    },
                    "min": 0,
                    "max": "unlimited"
                }
            }
        },
        "isRoot": true,
        "indexes": [
            ["name"]
        ]
    },
    "Item": {
        "columns": {
            "status": {
                "type": "string"
            },
            "description": {
                "type": "string"
            }
        }
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

In lines 2 and 23 are the names of our two tables, List and Item. The
List table has two columns: name, and items. The name column is easy to
read: it's just a string datatype. The items column, on the other hand,
is more involved, but it basically is a set of references to the UUID
column of the Item table and it can have 0 or more references.

Yes, you read that right. In traditional database schemas, the child
table references the parent table. In OVSDB, it's the other way around
and this primarily (probably exclusively) has something to do with its
automatic garbage collection feature. Let me explain by pointing out
the "isRoot" key in the schema (line 18). When a table's isRoot key is
set to true, that means that its records will never be garbage collected.
However, if the isRoot key is false or not defined, then any record in
that table that is not referenced by any other records in other tables
will be automatically garbage collected. This feature is very crucial
for environments like networking where communication between devices (e.g.
OVS and controller) must be as efficient as possible.

We'll see that in action shortly. First, let's continue by starting
OVSDB and loading our newly created database:

{% highlight bash %}
root@server1:~# ovsdb-server --pidfile --detach --log-file --remote punix:/var/run/openvswitch/db.sock /etc/tododb/todo.db
{% endhighlight %}

Let's check that our database was loaded properly:

{% highlight bash %}
root@server1:~# ovsdb-client list-dbs
todo
{% endhighlight %}

If that command didn't print `todo` then you probably missed a step.
Go back and review the steps. If you have it working properly, let's
proceed by having OVSDB listening for connections on port 6640.

{% highlight bash %}
root@server1:~# ovs-appctl -t ovsdb-server ovsdb-server/add-remote ptcp:6640
{% endhighlight %}

> SIDENOTE: The `p` in `ptcp` means passive. You can alternatively
> make OVSDB accept only SSL/TLS-based connections by using `pssl`.
> See `man ovsdb-server` for more info on that.

Alright, we've now set up our To Do List database. If at any point after
this you need to reset the state of the database, just execute
`/vagrant/shared/lesson03/reset_todo_db.sh` while logged in as root
in `server1`:

{% highlight bash %}
root@server1:~# /vagrant/shared/lesson03/reset_todo_db.sh
2014-09-22T04:57:34Z|00001|vlog|INFO|opened log file /var/log/openvswitch/ovsdb-server.log
{% endhighlight %}

Let's log in to `server2` and monitor the List table in `server1` for
changes:

{% highlight bash %}
$ vagrant ssh server2

vagrant@server2:~$ ovsdb-client monitor tcp:192.168.1.10:6640 todo List
{% endhighlight %}

That command should not return anything since it's just waiting for
the OVSDB server in `server1` to send update notifications. So let's
login to `internet` and add a row on the List table:

{% highlight bash %}
$ vagrant ssh internet

vagrant@internet:~$ ovsdb-client transact tcp:192.168.1.10:6640 '["todo",{"op":"insert", "table":"List", "row":{"name":"List1"} }]'

[{"uuid":["uuid","cb706f22-ecae-432f-85ef-ecf7197849bc"]}]
{% endhighlight %}

In the above command, we used the `ovsdb-client` CLI tool to execute a
transaction against the OVSDB server in `server1`. The last argument of
the command specifies the parameters of that transaction. In the first element
of that array, we say that we are performing the transaction against
our `todo` database. The second element is our one and only operation
which happens to be an insert on the List table with a row named
`List1`. After the transaction has completed, OVSDB responds with the
UUID of our newly created row.

Shifting back to our `server2` terminal, we can see that OVSDB sent us
an update notification:

{% highlight bash %}
row                                  action items name    _version
------------------------------------ ------ ----- ------- ------------------------------------
cb706f22-ecae-432f-85ef-ecf7197849bc insert []    "List1" 28055108-2115-42af-9224-67e794f3dd33
{% endhighlight %}

Neat! Now let's try creating Item rows. `Ctrl-C` in `server2` and issue
the command below to start monitoring the `Item` table.

{% highlight bash %}
vagrant@server2:~$ ovsdb-client monitor tcp:192.168.1.10:6640 todo Item
{% endhighlight %}

Head back to `internet` and execute the following command:

{% highlight bash %}
vagrant@internet:~$ ovsdb-client transact tcp:192.168.1.10:6640 '["todo",{"op":"insert", "table":"Item", "row":{"description":"Sample Item1"} }]'

[{"uuid":["uuid","4f08243f-1dbe-4820-8ed9-4559bbc44474"]}]
{% endhighlight %}

Shift back to `server2` and you will see...nothing. Why??? Remember our
`.ovsschema` file above? We specified that the Item table is not a root
table. Therefore, any row we create there that's not referenced by a List
row is automatically garbage collected. In the above command, as soon as
OVSDB created the row, it was immediately deleted so OVSDB didn't bother
sending an update notification to `server2`. We can double check by running
the select method against the Item table back in `internet`:

{% highlight bash %}
vagrant@internet:~$ ovsdb-client transact tcp:192.168.1.10:6640 '["todo",{"op":"select", "table":"Item", "where": []}]'

[{"rows":[]}]
{% endhighlight %}

Cool. Garbage collection works. Now let's try and create an Item that
won't be garbage collected. Head back to `internet` and execute the
following transaction against `server1`:

{% highlight bash %}
vagrant@internet:~$ ovsdb-client transact tcp:192.168.1.10:6640 '["todo",{"op":"insert", "table":"Item", "row":{"description":"Sample Item1", "status": "new"}, "uuid-name":"newitem" }, {"op":"insert", "table":"List", "row":{"name":"List2", "items":["set",[["named-uuid","newitem"]]]}}]'

[{"uuid":["uuid","8ccb47e3-c216-447d-8c8e-70854e8532b9"]},{"uuid":["uuid","7762efbf-ce69-4d71-b6e5-30315b5077f7"]}]
{% endhighlight %}

There's a lot more going on above so let's pretty-fy the last argument:

{% highlight json linenos %}
[
    "todo",
    {
        "op": "insert",
        "table": "Item",
        "row": {
            "description": "Sample Item1",
            "status": "new"
        },
        "uuid-name": "newitem"
    },
    {
        "op": "insert",
        "table": "List",
        "row": {
            "name": "List2",
            "items": [
                "set",
                [
                    ["named-uuid", "newitem"]
                ]
            ]
        }
    }
]
{% endhighlight %}

* In line 2, we can see that this transaction is still for the `todo` database
* Lines 3 to 11 is our first operation and it inserts a new row in the Item table
* Line 10 is something new and is useful if you want to reference the UUID of
  new Item in a subsequent operation within the same transaction. You'll see this
  being used in the next operation.
* Lines 12 to 24 is our second operation and it inserts a new row in the List
  table. To reference the item we created in the previous operation, we make use
  of its uuid-name.

> NOTE: The uuid-name is temporary and is only valid within the transaction. If
> you ever want to reference the row after the transaction has completed, you can
> A) capture the UUID provided in OVSDB's response or B) run a select against the
> table and capture the UUID from that response.

Head back to `server2` to see the following update:

{% highlight bash %}
row                                  action description    status _version
------------------------------------ ------ -------------- ------ ------------------------------------
8ccb47e3-c216-447d-8c8e-70854e8532b9 insert "Sample Item1" new    4d8ba412-cb02-4156-af8b-9dc0dbc68f15
{% endhighlight %}

Let's add one more Item to List2:

{% highlight bash %}
vagrant@internet:~$ ovsdb-client transact tcp:192.168.1.10:6640 '["todo",{"op":"insert", "table":"Item", "row":{"description":"Sample Item2", "status": "new"}, "uuid-name":"anotheritem" }, {"op":"mutate", "table":"List", "where":[["name", "==", "List2"]], "mutations":[["items", "insert", ["set",[["named-uuid", "anotheritem"]]]]] }]'

[{"uuid":["uuid","bf1573b8-3506-4b88-bf99-ab9c7f148cb5"]},{"count":1}]
{% endhighlight %}

Let's look at the transaction parameters more closely:

{% highlight json linenos %}
[
    "todo",
    {
        "op": "insert",
        "table": "Item",
        "row": {
            "description": "Sample Item2",
            "status": "new"
        },
        "uuid-name": "anotheritem"
    },
    {
        "op": "mutate",
        "table": "List",
        "where": [
            ["name", "==", "List2"]
        ],
        "mutations": [
            [
                "items",
                "insert",
                [
                    "set",
                    [
                        ["named-uuid", "anotheritem"]
                    ]
                ]
            ]
        ]
    }
]
{% endhighlight %}

* As with the previous transaction, this one operates on the `todo` database.
* Lines 3 to 10 is just another insert operation on the Item table. Notice
  that we gave it a uuid-name of anotheritem.
* Lines 12 to 30 is a mutate operation on the List table, specifically on
  our List2 row. This operation is useful for manipulating columns of type
  set or map where we want to add or remove references to other tables. In
  this case, we are inserting the newly created Item's UUID.

Let's check how our todo database looks like by using the dump command

{% highlight bash %}
vagrant@internet:~$ ovsdb-client dump tcp:192.168.1.10:6640 todo

Item table
_uuid                                description    status
------------------------------------ -------------- ------
f49d6f47-2fbd-4f6c-b49c-8c57f36eb79f "Sample Item1" new
88bd4bcd-a199-41d6-9ff5-0eb406d9e776 "Sample Item2" new

List table
_uuid                                items                                                                        name
------------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------
da864eed-b4e8-4bcb-b183-e8fc3622bbfb []                                                                           "List1"
f0d4fc1a-9862-4091-b07d-69f2b578bf80 [88bd4bcd-a199-41d6-9ff5-0eb406d9e776, f49d6f47-2fbd-4f6c-b49c-8c57f36eb79f] "List2"
{% endhighlight %}

You should have two Item rows and two List rows with List2 referencing
both Item rows.

## Hands-on Part 2: Using OVSDB as a Chat database

Here's something a little bit more fun. I've created two python scripts
that use OVSDB as a chat room. It's a very limited implementation in that
one script can only send a message and the other can only receive them
but it should be enough to further showcase some of OVSDB's features.

Go to `server1` and execute the following:

{% highlight bash %}
root@server1:~# /vagrant/shared/lesson03/reset_chat_db.sh

2014-09-22T06:44:38Z|00001|vlog|INFO|opened log file /var/log/openvswitch/ovsdb-server.log
{% endhighlight %}

You've just reset OVSDB and made it load a different database called `chat`.
Start tailing its logs. The reset script above set the loglevel to debug
so that you can see the messages passing between OVSDB and its clients.

{% highlight bash %}
root@server1:~# tail -f /var/log/openvswitch/ovsdb-server.log
{% endhighlight %}

Now go to `internet` and execute the receiver script:

{% highlight bash %}
vagrant@internet:~$ python /vagrant/shared/lesson03/receiver.py 192.168.1.10
Connecting to chat room...
Connected.
(OVSDB) PING?
PONG!
(OVSDB) PING?
PONG!
{% endhighlight %}

You should see OVSDB sends pings regularly and the receiver responding
with a pong. This is OVSDB's inactivity probe sequence and is its way
of checking if the remote client is still connected. If our receiver
did not reply back in time, OVSDB promptly closes the socket.

Next, let's go to `server2` and run the sender script:

{% highlight bash %}
vagrant@server2:~$ python /vagrant/shared/lesson03/sender.py 192.168.1.10 relaxdiego

Your message:
{% endhighlight %}

Type a message and hit ENTER to see your message pop up on the receiver
terminal. Also check the OVSDB logs to see your message being received
and passed on to the receiver.

Feel free to poke around the code to understand how the scripts talk to
OVSDB! If you want to learn some more about the various other methods
that you can call against it, please consult [IETF RFC 7047](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7047)

## Parting Thoughts

OVSDB is a very interesting and versatile tool with potential applications
independent of Open_vSwitch. In fact, in [my previous post](/2014/09/hardware_vtep.html),
we've seen that we can even use it as a front for hardware VTEPs. In this
post, we've seen that it can even be applied to other things outside of
SDN. Now, while I can't vouch for its efficacy outside of SDN (since I
have not really done any performance tests on it outside of SDN), I hope
this post did its job of showing what you can do with the tool.

Also, this post talks about just a small fraction of what OVSDB can do.
To learn more about the other methods available, please see [IETF RFC 7047](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7047).

That's it for now. Feel free to ask questions below!
