---
layout: post
title: HA Kubernetes Outside the Cloud
comments: true
categories: ha, k8s, kubernetes, etcd, resilient, high-availbility
---

Let's say you want to install a piece of software on your desktop. Let's
make it more fun and say you want to install the latest, coolest, most
awesomest (yes, I just made that word a thing!) video game. What's the
first thing you want to check before you buy it? You normally would check
the system requirements. How much CPU power does it need? Do you need to
buy more RAM? Will it be fine on HDDs (spinning disks) or does it require
SSDs? Should you install (and therefore maintain/operate) some liquid-based
cooling mechanism on your machine? These are very important questions to
ask because it will affect your overall gaming experience. Depending on
your preferences, you might get by with the minimum requirements or you
might want to soup up your gear before proceeding. It's really a function
of "how much of the total experience do you want to have?" and "how much
of it can you afford?"
 
This is the same with Kubernetes. It's capable of delivering an HA
experience provided you give it the recommended resource requirements
but if the cost of doing that is too steep and you don't mind giving up
HA (in the case of short-lived or throw-away environments), you can go
with the minimum set. So what are these different levels of the
"Kubernetes experience" and their respective "system requirements?"
Here's a video that talks about some of them:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/gu3XJ5l2XxM" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

So now the question is: what is the level of Kubernetes experience that
you want and how much of its resource requirements can you afford? 
[Let's discuss!](https://github.com/relaxdiego/relaxdiego.github.com/issues/12)

---

Thanks to the fine folks at [kubernetes.slack.com](https://kubernetes.slack.com)
for the help. Shout out to [mauilion](https://kubernetes.slack.com/team/mauilion)
for answering my n00b questions!
