---
layout: post
title: Dealing with ISO 8601 in Python
comments: false
categories: python, date, datetime, time zones, iso8601
---

ISO 8601 datetime strings are great but they come with surprising
special conditions that you may need to consider when the datetime
strings come from an external client. There are third-party libraries
out there that can ease your burden but, for times when you don't have
the luxury of using anything but stock Python, read on.

*NOTE: All code snippets below are available on [Github](https://github.com/relaxdiego/relaxdiego.github.com/tree/master/_includes/code-snippets/iso8601)*.

Let's start with the simplest case.

{% highlight python linenos %}
{% include code-snippets/iso8601/s01_simple_case.py %}
{% endhighlight %}

I told you it would be simple!

OK but does this datetime actually have time zone information? Let's check:

{% highlight python linenos %}
{% include code-snippets/iso8601/s02_check_time_zone.py %}
{% endhighlight %}

Hmmm. That's interesting. What's going on here? As it turns out, the
`datetime.fromisoformat()` method is very limited in its support for
ISO 8601 [as its documentation states](https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html#datetime.datetime.fromisoformat).
So if we want to ensure that it has time zone information, we could
ask the user to supply it in the string:

{% highlight python linenos %}
{% include code-snippets/iso8601/s03_include_time_zone_in_str.py %}
{% endhighlight %}

Huh, that was unexpected. I guess we should've listened to this part of
the method's documentation:

> **Caution** This does not support parsing arbitrary ISO 8601 strings
> \- it is only intended as the inverse operation of datetime.isoformat().
> A more full-featured ISO 8601 parser, dateutil.parser.isoparse is
> available in the third-party package [dateutil](https://dateutil.readthedocs.io/en/stable/).

OK, but what if, as I mentioned earlier, we don't have the luxury of
installing a third-party library???

Well I guess we could just translate the 'Z' character...

{% highlight python linenos %}
{% include code-snippets/iso8601/s04_translate_z_suffix.py %}
{% endhighlight %}

That's what I'm talking about!

But wait, what if I want time zone information to be automatically added
to the datetime object? We can totally do that!

{% highlight python linenos %}
{% include code-snippets/iso8601/s05_auto_add_time_zone.py %}
{% endhighlight %}

Hmmm, that's a good question. I guess we should first ask: what is the
expectation of the client that provided that string. If the client is
a person using a browser, then they probably are thinking about their
current timezone. Is it possible for the browser to send that time zone
information within its request? If so, then use that!

But what if this code is part of a software that recognizes individual
user preferences and those preferences include the time zone? Maybe you
should use that?

Now what if that string was provided via a configuration file? I guess
we could use the time zone of the server that's running this code? Maybe?

Look the point is that the answer to the question of which time zone to
use will depend on the expectation of the client that provided the string
as well as any conventions that are used in the larger codebase that
contains this code snippet.

For this example, I'll just assume Zulu time:

{% highlight python linenos %}
{% include code-snippets/iso8601/s06_there_is_only_zulu.py %}
{% endhighlight %}

Great! But wait one more thing: can we manually override the time zone?

{% highlight python linenos %}
{% include code-snippets/iso8601/s07_there_is_also_other_zones.py %}
{% endhighlight %}

Sweet. Alright so we can provide a good enough support for ISO 8601 in
our code without having to import third-party libraries. It's not foolproof
but for very simple situations, it'll do. For more complex ones, there's
the [dateutil library](https://dateutil.readthedocs.io/en/stable/).
